# Incident: 2024-12-05 10-15-00

## Summary

Between the hours of 10:16 and 12:20 on December 5, 2024, 240 simulated users encountered 30 second delays to pizza ordering. The event was triggered by a scheduled chaos event at 10:16. The chaos event was scheduled with the intention of testing the team's alert, metric, and logging systems.

The event was detected by Grafana OnCall, which recognized that pizza order latencies greater than 200ms. The team started working on the event by reviewing log and metric reports in Grafana and finding a "reportUrl" link within the server response to stop the chaos. This event of mid-level criticality affected 100% of users who tried to purchase a pizza.

## Detection

The incident was detected when the Pizza Purchase Latency Alert was triggered and Andrea Gettys was notified via email and, after 5 minutes, with a push notification. She responded to the event an hour and a half after it initially happened because she was at work until noon.

In the future, more on-call engineers will be added so there is more availability to handle these alerts.

## Timeline

All times are MST.

- _10:15_ - Chaos event begins
- _10:16_ - Pizza purchase latency increases to 32 seconds
- _10:21_ - Alert email was sent to engineers
- _10:26_ - Grafana push notification was sent to engineers
- _10:32_ - Secondary alert email was sent to engineers
- _10:37_ - Secondary Grafana push notification was sent to engineers
- _12:05_ - On-call engineer is able to begin assessing the issue
- _12:15_ - Engineer searches logs to understand what is happening
- _12:20_ - Engineer uses a link from the logs to end the chaos
- _12:21_ - Grafana OnCall alert is marked as "Resolved"

## Response

After receiving emails and push notifications from 10:16 to 10:37, Andrea Gettys came online at 12:05 to figure out the root of the cause in Grafana.

# Root Cause

## Resolution

The engineers had previously set up metric and logging systems, so they used this to understand what happened. They were able to review logs of all HTTP requests and records of useful website metrics. Because the concern was with pizza creation latency, the team looked specifically at the "PUT" requests to "/api/order". 

# Prevention

The root cause of this issue is unlikely to occur in the future unless intentional. The chaos event was scheduled to test our systems, so further use of this method of testing is not a concern.

# Action Items

1. This report will be submitted to Canvas under "Deliverable 11"
2. More on-call engineers will be added to the team
